foreign
I'm the chief product officer at
digitalocean I'm really excited to share
some of what I've learned about
approaching product development with a
Founders mentality including uh the
difference between candy vitamins and
painkillers in the world of product
so before we jump in I thought it'd be
helpful to share a little bit about my
background you know personally prior to
digitalocean where I've been having a
lot of fun I was responsible for most of
the develop developer facing services in
Microsoft Azure uh and so while I was
there I learned a lot about you know
running large products and Engineering
teams I was accountable for billions of
dollars in Revenue there but I actually
came to Microsoft through an acquisition
of a startup I founded called Deus and
though today you know I'm an executive
at a publicly traded company I actually
consider myself a founder and an
entrepreneur at heart and I'm going to
tell you share a little bit about that
Journey
um look I've been very fortunate in my
career uh and frankly very lucky
throughout my career I think luck is is
often underestimated I've sold two
startups uh at Microsoft I started
azure's kubernetes service which is the
fastest growing Service uh compute
service in azure's history I helped
digitalocean launch their first
serverless product this year lots more
Innovation we've been delivering at
digitalocean recently
um but
but those successes mask a lot of
failures along the way and I personally
think it's less interesting to talk
about the successes than it is about the
failure so we're going to spend some
time today talking about stuff that blew
up and went wrong and and what we uh
what I sort of took away from that
so
um
tell some stories first story I'm going
to tell is the first startup I ever
founded uh company SAS started actually
called optimand and I haven't actually
told this story publicly before so this
should be fun
so uh let's rewind the clock back to
2011 right uh Oprah has her final
episode Adele is on the top of the
charts right good times right uh in the
technology landscape though what we saw
was everything was about AWS right
Amazon web services they were growing
like crazy uh tech companies are
realizing this Cloud thing might be for
real there's all these benefits you know
it's a cloud elasticity converting capex
and Opex all these reasons people want
to move to the cloud however
the word on the street is AWS is too
hard and that that complexity is
hindering customers ability to realize
the benefits of the cloud uh more
flexible elastic even sure all that
stuff right so I decided with my friend
to start a company and the goal was to
make AWS simpler for end users who
wanted to experience the benefits of the
cloud and we were going to do that via a
software as a service product called
optimand and the name here signified
operations Cloud operations on demand
that's what we set out to do and you
know Eric Reese's Lean Startup book
hadn't quite come out yet but we were on
the level right like we knew it was all
lean and mean we were all about
delivering that mvp and so we did what
anyone would do in this situation we
raised some seed money right and you
know I don't want to gloss over that
that was actually kind of difficult but
we did that we with that Capital we got
our MVP out in a year right and you can
see sort of you know on the screen here
a picture of the landing page and uh
inside of that laptop view is a view of
the product and it was beautiful the
product was just marvelous and I think
we may have over engineered a little bit
but look it was great I'm still missing
a bunch of features so still an MVP but
there was much rejoicing we were very
proud of what we had shipped
but that was short-lived because the
product traction wasn't anywhere near
what we had expected right uh we were
you were getting website visitors at the
top of the funnel but the conversion was
low in terms of actual product usage and
the revenue was even lower right but
we're lean and mean startup folks we
know this is part of the journey you
know we're gonna we're gonna iterate
right and so we did what anyone would do
in this circumstance we started talking
deeply with customers and so you know
the way this worked is we would email
customers who signed up we try and set
up a feedback call and hopefully we get
folks on the phone and learn a little
bit more about that the first thing that
we found when we were talking with these
folks was customers were actually
confused about our value proposition
they didn't understand how the product
could help them right they clearly
signed up which is you know how we got
them on the phone in the first place but
it was obvious that they weren't really
enthusiastic about the product they were
giving it a go right and those that we
did engage found that you know did
engage deeply in terms of using the
product they did actually enjoy using it
so that was good but at the same time
they weren't able to or willing frankly
to put in the effort to actually adopt
the product in a meaningful way and that
was a big challenge for us so
as we're digesting this customer
feedback you'll be a good idea of what
went wrong right our minimum viable
product was too minimal right very
common uh perception right we just
didn't have enough features right and we
had this long road map of stuff that was
excluded from the MVP so on these calls
we're asking customers you know well
what features would get you really
excited about using the products right
and we collected this long list and some
of those things were on a roadmap some
of them were new things that we heard
and you know support for discovering and
importing resources team collaboration
new types of templates and so we worked
through that list we prioritized it and
in startup lean fashion we cranked out
and delivered all those new features
and nothing
no impact
no impact on how frustrating is that
right you listen to customers you build
what they claim that they want and
there's actually no impact on the other
side of that and so at this point the
team's actually kind of like fighting
amongst themselves because clearly you
know we're having a hard time figuring
out how to guide the future Direction uh
you know at this point things are
looking kind of grim and so with
desperation in the air you know I
personally decided to go reach out to
customers again but this time
I wasn't going to talk about our product
right I was instead going to ask higher
level questions why did you land on our
website right what is it you were trying
to do right did well why did you land
your website we were trying to build an
application okay you know that sort of
lines up with what we had thought well
what do you usually do when you want to
build an application many customers said
AWS great awesome that was sort of the
premise of the company so good to hear
that a lot of other customers said we
use Heroku and we actually didn't expect
that we didn't think we were competing
with Heroku but from the perspective of
our customers we were and actually
that's what matters more and the
follow-on question of that is well why
not just use Heroku
and I'll never forget I got this quote
from it must have been 10 customers if
you could give me something like Heroku
that I could run on my own AWS account
that would give me the control and
flexibility that I need and I would pay
a lot for that emphasis on that last
point and I would pay a lot for that
and so with that we executed a pivot
right and this is one of those difficult
startup pivots uh you know I I lost team
members during this period uh it was
unclear whether this was going to be
successful we didn't really have you
know necessarily enough Capital to fully
execute the pivot we weren't sure how
this is going to work very common
position a lot of startups will find
themselves in and so we pivoted towards
you know essentially delivering on that
last what I would pay a lot for and to
our surprise I suppose to some of the
team members surprised it was wildly
successful uh you know we saw lots of
traction in terms of days being adopted
for you know folks who are looking to
make AWS easier to use the Asus was
ultimately acquired Twice first by a
company called engine yard the Ruby on
Rails pass later we spun that out and it
was acquired Again by Microsoft and
that's how I ended up getting it to
Microsoft to bootstrap the container
services business and so you know it's
interesting to me
people ask me like well like where's
your big takeaways like on on this
journey and I go back to this phrase
that I heard which is candy vitamins and
painkillers in the World Of Products so
let me let me talk a little bit about
you know what I mean here first I want
to give credit where credit's due I
actually had to do a little bit of
digging on this this is actually from
Kevin Fong a venture capitalist and the
quote I was able to find is we divide
business plans into three categories
candy vitamins and painkillers we throw
away the candy we look at the vitamins
and we really like the painkillers now
to Define this a little bit more deeply
candy it's a nice treat right but you
can live without it
right vitamins vitamins improve your
life right but they are a nice to have
and painkillers are the must-haves and
because of the must-haves they end up
being the easiest things to sell now I
want to be very clear about this not
every product must be a painkiller to be
successful candy sells really well a
good example this is gaming right game
video games mobile games on your phone
that's candy right it's giving you a
quick dopamine hit like you can make a
lot of money selling candy let's be very
clear there's great product experiences
that you could build there it's
important to know what you're selling
whether you're selling candy vitamins or
painkillers and again painkillers tend
to be the easiest to sell now the
problem that we had with optimand was we
were failing to communicate what we were
offering the uh the UI was candy the
marketing made it feel like a vitamin
AWS Made Easy is you know indicative of
something that's a nice nice to have not
a must-have but we were selling it as if
it was a must-have and it was just
completely misaligned and our entire go
to market suffered as a result
but to put this into more Focus I want
to say another story which is the story
of azure container service which it just
turns out is sort of the next thing I
did right after I joined Microsoft
so uh as happens uh when you join a
large company through an acquisition I
was immediately handed some stuff that
was being worked on by other teams in
this case a service a product called
Azure container service uh had went GA
in 2016 about a year before I had
arrived and the idea here was you know a
push button access to a container
orchestration system in the cloud uh
different flavors of orchestration the
specifics of the product didn't really
matter because to me as a product person
I need to figure out what is the
perceived value from our end users and
so that's exactly what I started to do
so so you know once I arrived I started
interviewing customers
and what I found during those interviews
was ACS really was a vitamin and it
wasn't a painkiller and and here are
some quotes that I was able to to recall
from these from these discussions uh I
was able to set up the equivalent
solution myself on Azure but ACS saved
me a lot of time
okay ACS is great I was able to get rid
of my custom solution and switch to ACS
ACS doesn't yet support the server type
I need so I'm going to keep using my own
solution and I'll probably switch over
if you add this feature
what's what's common here is there's
another solution to this problem
right
ACS was not a must-have given these
quotes it was a nice to have right and
screams vitamin in terms of this
taxonomy of vitamins uh and painkillers
and so what we did with this and this is
you know stuff I'd learned uh during the
Optima experience was really put the
product away right ACS was my product
forget about that
talk about what the customer outcome
needs to be and clearly in this case
there was a custom solution that folks
were using instead of the product that I
wanted them to be buying and so I
started asking questions about what they
were using for their custom solution
well customers with their own solution
experience pain with upgrades and
reliability it takes too much time to
upgrade to new versions We have to set
up and move systems move things around
tear the old system down okay that
sounds kind of painful when we're
serving a lot of traffic our homegrown
systems sometimes crashes
ouch that sounds painful we aren't sure
why we need something more reliable for
our customers
interesting this sounds painful right
and so with this you know knowledge and
and with this feedback what we were able
to do is take sort of the general
product landscape that we were in but
pivot it to a different area which
resulted in the creation of azure's
kubernetes service AKs which is a
product that I helped launch in uh 2017
following the feedback uh that I was
just sharing with you uh AKs featured
all of the things that customers were
asking for better reliability upgrade
support integrated all the stuff we were
hearing that was painful for customers
was present in this new product and in
this new solution and as a result
this became the fastest growing compute
service in the history of azure
very impressive and to me a great
example of the difference between
vitamins and painkillers now to go a
little bit deeper into this I want to
share uh you know some more lessons that
I've learned throughout this journey and
there are quite a few so I I'm limiting
a bit here
the first thing I would say is if I
could go back and do it all over again
to startups you know all the engineering
work and product work that I did you
know while at Azure uh you know even
some stuff we've done early at do
um I would really take this concept of
road before code a lot more seriously to
understand if you are building candy
vitamins or painkillers you need to take
a design first approach uh where you're
out engaged in Market talking with
customers ideally before you write a
line of code and in fact we've
operationalized this at digitalocean and
you know we're well known for building
very simple products we do this as part
of the uh design-led engineering that we
perform at do and that's part of the
reason we get products that have that
level of Simplicity built in from the
outset so what does this really look
like well really what you want to do is
you want to study the desired outcomes
of your customer very carefully right
it's outcome focused it's not product
feature and functionality focused
you also want to make sure that you're
designing your product experiences to
enable those outcomes to become seamless
right it should be part of the product
Journey that those outcomes are able to
be achieved our customers don't have to
exit your product come back to your
product in order to achieve that outcome
but the biggest thing I found is
documenting your core product flows in a
visual walkthrough and then walking
customers through here's what the
product would look like if we built it
right you didn't build anything other
than some mocks or some screenshots
right you built just some floats in
terms of you know what you would design
for folks and when you do that and when
you bring your engineering team along
for the ride as you're talking with
customers you end up developing a sense
of customer empathy and you're able to
understand how your customers perceive
your product
uh and you know this is unbelievably
critical because there's a very big
difference between what you put on the
marketing page in terms of the value
pillars for your product product is
going to help you save money it's going
to help you you know and be more
productive it's going to help you do
whatever help make your team happier
right
that's your marketing page when you talk
to your customers what they perceive the
value of your product to be is way more
important than what you think the value
of your product is and you're never
going to know that if you don't spend
time talking with your customers and and
sort of uh doing that work up front to
de-risk the engineering cycle because
again it's extremely expensive to
actually build something all the way
through think about that mvp that we
built at op Demand right that cost me
about a million bucks to go deliver that
million dollars I didn't really have
meaningful product feedback until after
I had shipped a MVP that cost me a
million bucks
what if I had just built some mocks and
talked to customers early on
right how much would that cost me 50K
25k
right
de-risking product development is the
goal in road before code
um and the other part about this is
avoiding the pivots right like yeah it's
funny in the in the startup ecosystem we
talk a lot about pivoting they're sort
of uh you know hey we pivoted and we
worked through it but you know what I've
lived pivots many times in my career
they are not fun I don't want to have to
do a pivot right and and so I if you can
hit the road before you code you can
avoid that painful experience and I'd
really encourage all you to think about
that as you move forward
the next thing I want to share is a
concept called jobs to be done and you
know this is really uh deeply ingrained
in how we develop product it's
digitalocean but it's something that you
know I've become really attached to uh
as I've developed my product leadership
skills this concept comes from clay
Christensen over at Harvard Business
School and there's this really cool
YouTube video that I've linked to in the
deck and I really encourage you to to
check it out if you haven't uh but he
talks about how Harvard Business School
works with McDonald's to help them
increase milkshake sales right and so
you know
Christensen team you know they they
essentially ask customers uh you know
what they wanted and they built that
right so you go talk to milkshake
customers say hey you know what would we
need to do to make the milkshake better
so you'd want to buy more milkshakes
right and they did that and they
collected this long list of features and
they add added all of that stuff into
the milkshake recipe and they went back
to the customer said here's the brand
new and improved milk Chase has got
everything you asked for in it and what
was the result
no impact didn't impact sales and
milkshakes at all
right does that sound familiar does that
sound familiar for any of you in the
audience asking customers hey what can
we do to improve the product you go do
that thing nothing ends up happening not
all that uncommon I found right so what
they did here with this jobs to be done
framework is they thought about the
problem differently and they they said
customers are hiring the milkshake to do
a job right and it was actually in the
morning one of the weird things about
milkshake sales is people buy milkshakes
at like in the morning is is that weird
it's like you think it's like a dessert
or whatever but no milkshake sales
happen in the morning so what was the
job to be done at 7 A.M you know where
people were buying a milkshake right and
how could we understand that job better
to help improve milkshakes well after
they focused on the end goal what they
realized was that customers the job to
be done was they had a long and boring
commute to work in the morning
and what they needed was something to
keep them engaged during that commute to
work and also they needed so that when
the 10 o'clock came around they weren't
hungry starving so they could buy a
little bit of time to get to lunch and
that was the job that they were hiring
the milkshake for turned out you could
also hire a banana for that job but
banana really doesn't do the job that
well you could hire a candy bar for that
job now candy bar is going to make you
feel kind of gross right and and you
might not want to do that every day yeah
that could be problematic from a health
perspective so what they ended up doing
with this knowledge was by understanding
the job they realized things like the
viscosity of the milkshake how long it
took to drink the milkshake actually
impacted the level of Engagement during
that drive to work right because if you
suck the milkshake down in 10 seconds
it's like then well that didn't really
help me on my long drive to work if the
milkshake takes you five minutes to
drink because you really can't pull it
up through that straw it's due to
viscous well that keeps you engaged
you're in the director working that's
how they were able to improve the
milkshake and increase sales overall so
you know look I
build the best version of the product in
this case it was Candy by the way uh
milk Chaser clearly candy in terms of
vitamins candies and Pecos you must
understand the job to be done and you
know for me when I'm thinking about you
know what we learned here with azure's
container service ACS customers wanted
to hire ACS to upgrade their clusters
they wanted to higher ACS to provide
reliability a reliable infrastructure
for them we weren't fulfilling the job
to be done that they had brought to the
table and that was a big problem but the
first step was in understanding what
that job was
so
the next thing I learned here and the
final thing is this concept of pivoting
from vitamins to painkillers by finding
these must-haves in the product
experience so you know at off demand you
know we put out a product and it turned
out that product was a vitamin right it
was a nice to have for folks which is
okay right A lot of the stuff we do is
not going to be a painkiller right out
of the gate and that's that's fine
but through a process of engaging with
customers and really searching for what
are those must-haves we found out I
don't have enough control
in either your product or whatever my
alternatives are to your product and
that was the must-have
and it turned out that we were able to
Pivot the product in the same general
area mind you but we were able to Pivot
the product around that must-have that
led to Deus Deus ended up being wildly
successful right and so
I'd also argue days would never have
happened had we not started with the
vitamin that was off demand and so you
can start on one end of the spectrum and
migrate across same story for Azure
container service or Azure container
service you know it wasn't getting the
job done for customers it wasn't nice to
have people had their own custom
solutions that they were using for this
you know they didn't need ACS they just
didn't and they told us that pretty
pretty verbatim and they said to us I am
spending too much time managing
infrastructure and that is painful for
me
right and so as we worked on you know
adapting a solution to that we came out
with azure's kubernetes service which
was directly derived from the product uh
and learnings that we had through Azure
container service and Azure kubernetes
service again uh turned out to be one of
the fastest growing Services uh in the
history of azure
so
to wrap up
key takeaways here are
when thinking about candy vitamins and
painkillers it's really important to
make sure you hit the road before you
code
it is you know myself I'm an engineer by
trade right I'm a product guy now Chief
product officer you know today but I
used to write code and that used to be
all I wanted to do and it was really
hard for me as a more technical person
to go talk to customers right I wanted
to spend more time building build build
build that was the mentality build build
right talking to customers de-risks the
build and it's actually a whole lot less
painful but most importantly it helps
you understand how your customers
perceive your products not what you want
them to perceive your product as but how
it's perceived in reality is it candy is
it a vitamin is it a painkiller and by
taking this design first approach where
you leverage technology like design
Sprints yeah you know I I don't know how
many of you are familiar with the
concept of design Sprints that come out
of Google or the concept of a customer
driven Playbook that has come out of
Microsoft these are Frameworks you can
use to help structure Sprints that will
allow you to understand perceived value
from your customers and help you de-risk
product development so I'd encourage
everyone in the audience here to check
out the book spring events uh you know
by the folks who have pioneered design
Sprints at Google can be very
accelerating to folks who want to engage
in this endeavor
the second point I mentioned is you got
to know your customers jobs to be done
it's really about understanding
motivations and outcome orientation all
too often in the product space we talk
about features we talk about voice of
the customer and we almost delegate the
product roadmap to what is the topmost
thing that customers are asking for and
as I've learned in in my experience if
you just build what customers ask for
and you don't take the time to
understand what they're really trying to
do you are going to get misled in your
product Direction you will get misled
you have to understand what is the
outcome what is the job to be done why
are they going to hire your product
versus the alternative products or
versus an alternative path altogether
and once you understand that you can
really start to to prioritize feature
development uh you know strategy in
terms of your product uh and everything
gets easier because you've clarified
what your customers actually need
and the last point I want to make is
pivoting from vitamins to painkillers by
finding must-haves we are all going to
you know build products that are all on
the Spectrum like candy vitamins
painkillers but you can change the
disposition of your product as you go by
spending time to understand what are
those must-haves in the product right
and you know it's interesting because as
the market dynamics change as your
customers change your product may start
out as a painkiller but as circumstances
in the economy change as Team Dynamics
changes organizational Dynamics change
your product may start as a painkiller
turn into a vitamin or turn into a a you
know a piece of candy that isn't
actually much value to the organization
overall it's important to keep a pulse
on the perceived value of your customers
and I found the framework of candy
vitamins and painkillers to be very
helpful in that
[Music]